

  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 331 PM EST Sun Dec 17 2023

A brief bout of locally heavy lake effect snow and high winds is
expected on Monday into Monday evening amid our otherwise mild,
dry, and tranquil December El Nino pattern.

No changes are being made to the headlines which were
issued/adjusted earlier and feature Winter Weather Advisories
near Lake Michigan plus a Warning for Van Buren County. Low level
flow regime is 330-340 degrees and considered also including
Allegan County in the warning but confidence not as high as south
of there where HREF focuses highest LPMM QPF.

High spatial variability in snow amounts and impacts (that we
typically see with lake effect) can be expected. In general we
anticipate 2 to 5 inches across the advisory area and 5 to 8
inches in the warning area. This will be accompanied by winds
gusting as high as 50 mph along the coast with blowing snow.

Isolated to scattered power outages are possible in some of the
lakeshore counties. Interstates 94 and 196 in the southwest corner
of Lower Michigan could be greatly impacted with travel impacts
due to whiteouts and slick conditions.

Potent nrn stream short wave drops in from the northwest late
tonight with H8 temps as cold as -14C swooping in behind the
associated strong cold front. Inversion heights bump up to over
10K ft on Monday while the upper trough is overhead, supporting
some intense L.E.S. snow bands.

Travel impacts may be limited initially early on Monday due to
mild sfc/road temps associated with our recent warmth but arrival
of the colder air and heavier snow rates should lead to slick
conditions developing as those are overcome.

CAMs indicate a strong possibility of a dominant band setting up
in the sw corner of the state on Monday but vary a bit on its
placement. Also of note/interest is the possibility of the nrn Lk
MI bands, pre-conditioned from Lake Superior, streaking well
inland over NW Lwr MI in the strong NNW flow. That is why we added
Lake and Osceola Cos earlier, but would not rule out some of
these more intense/skinny bands also intruding into parts of
Newaygo, Kent and Mecosta Cos briefly at times.

While heavier snow bands may linger into Monday evening near Lk
MI, a diminishing trend should set in after midnight with the
passage of the H5 shear axis on the back side of the departing
upr trough. Inversion heights and moisture depth will be quickly
dropping off as that occurs.



  --------------------------  NJJ  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 331 PM EST Sun Dec 17 2023

After a busy period of weather in the short term, the long term
looks relatively quiet with limited impacts through the weekend
leading up to the big holiday. Ridging builds in behind the
departing low complex on Tuesday. This ridge flattens out a bit with
low pressure near Hudson Bay, setting up a nearly zonal upper air
flow. It looks like a dry and increasing mild week through at least
Thursday.

A fair amount of uncertainty remains regarding the next system for
the Friday/Saturday time frame. The feature that this uncertainty is
centered on is once again energy that ejects out of the upper low
offshore of CA. There are solutions that range from the wave coming
through the state and bringing a bout of rain Thu night-Sat, to the
wave staying south of the state and the area staying dry. Ensemble
mean upper level flows would support more of a flat solution,
keeping the wave further south. While we do lean the way of the
flatter solution, we will keep some chcs of rain in from Thu-Sat.

Tough to get too specific with the forecast out on day 7 with the
uncertainty that lies in days 4-6, but we can get an idea of the
long wave pattern that is likely to take shape. There is good
agreement in the ensemble means that a couple of areas of low
pressure over the Nrn and Central Eastern Pacific will interact and
result in a fairly strong long wave trough over the Wrn States. This
is likely to pump up a ridge ahead of it. This is likely to take
shape somewhere from next Sunday or beyond. The likely result is
that we do not see any major cold snaps coming to the area through
Christmas.


  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1045 AM EST Sun Dec 17 2023

Will be making some modifications to the winter weather headlines
soon.

First, will be upgrading Van Buren County to a Winter Storm
Warning as new 12Z CAM guidance is strongly pointing toward a
dominant lake effect snow band setting up there in 330-340 flow
regime. Combined with winds gusting up to 50 mph this could lead
to frequent whiteouts in snow/blowing snow and significant travel
impacts along that well-traveled stretch of I-94 west of Kalamazoo
(and I-196 south of South Haven). That band could clip/impact
parts of Allegan County as well, but our confidence is lower
there than in VB County at this time.

Second, will be adding Lake and Osceola Counties to the
Winter Weather Advisory up north due to the decent possibility of
the strong winds and a Lake Superior connection carrying the
heavier bands well inland through NW Lwr MI and into at least the
nrn portion/highlands of those counties. WSWGRR update coming
soon.



  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday)
Issued at 339 AM EST Sun Dec 17 2023

- Rain showers continue Sunday

Rain showers will continue to move through the region earl this
morning continuing into this afternoon. Best rain will move along
a trough axis as it shifts east, however scattered showers will
continue through the afternoon. Overall rain totals will be one to
two tenths.
 Warm air advection will continue today with temperatures 10 to 15
degrees above normal. Daytime highs will be in the mid 40s.

- Snow and Blowing snow along the lakeshore Monday

 Cold air returns behind a front late Sunday night into Monday
morning. Strong upper level winds will coincide with the passage
of a mid level trough that will bring wind gusts upwards of 40 to
50 mph along the lakeshore.Temperatures will continue to fall
during the day couple that with lake effect snow bands and
travel impacts will be a concern due to slick roads and reduced
visibilities. Snowfall will be heavy at times with road
temperatures dropping through the day.

 Along with those incoming snow bands will be 850 mb temps of
around -9C. That cold air coupled with the gusty winds will bring
snow and blowing snow that will continue to intensify into Monday
afternoon.

The best snowfall rates currently look to be late Monday morning
through the first half of Monday afternoon. Best areas for
snowfall look to be north of Muskegon in and around Ludington and
in Van Buren counties. The latest GLERL FVCOM has sfc lake
temperatures of +8 to +9 C. Couple those warm lake temperatures
with -9C 850mb air and the result is strong 925 mb to 850mb Omega
values that will bring snow fall rates of a half an inch or more
an hour with snowfall totals around 2 to 5 with isolated higher
amounts possible. The biggest concern will be the combination of
wind and snow. The strong temperature gradient as stated above
should lead to 40 to 50 mph winds. Latest NAMNEST is showing CAPE
values along the lake shore of 120 to 300 J/kg. While that is low
for summertime convection, that is more then enough for convective
snow bands.
 While the bands will be intense, the gradient will weaken as
the trough shifts east and the gradient slackens into Monday
evening.



  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Saturday)
Issued at 339 AM EST Sun Dec 17 2023

Most of...if not all of the interesting weather is in the short term
portion of the forecast. The long term overall features moderating
temperatures once again with dry weather mid week transitioning
to some rain towards the end of the week.

As for the details...the lake effect snow will be winding down
quickly Monday evening as synoptic scale lift and deeper moisture
quickly peel away to the east. Any remaining lake effect snow that
persists into Monday night should mainly wind down during the
evening hours.

A dry period will then commence from overnight Monday night
stretching through Tuesday, Wednesday and into Thursday. The next
chances for precipitation (rain) will start Thursday night, with the
highest likelihood occurring Friday into Friday night. The upper
trough in place over the Great Lakes in the short term is replaced
by flat upper ridging during mid week for our dry period. As we get
late into the week and into the weekend a shortwave trough will be
moving through. Ridging at the surface during the middle of the week
will be replaced by a warm front nosing our direction from the south
Thursday night through Friday night. Some model disparity begins to
show up over the weekend with the timing of the upper shortwave
exiting to the east. The GFS pushes the shortwave to the east
quicker. Our model blend has lingering chances for rain showers into
the weekend at this point.

Bottom line...moderating temperatures (back into the 40s) with rain
developing later in the week. What snow falls towards the lakeshore
on Monday will be melting as we work through the upcoming week.



  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Sunday night)
Issued at 330 PM EST Sat Dec 16 2023

-Light showers tonight and Sunday; still mild

The bulk of the better/heavier QPF associated with the filling
Iowa low stays south of MI tonight and Sunday. Southeast winds
continue to feed dry air into the area, both delaying the onset
of the precipitation and holding down amounts as dew points hold
in the 30s for much of the night.

In general will have likely pops near and south of I-96 tonight
and chance pops to the north. On Sunday the higher/best pops will
be restricted to the morning hours when the upper trough axis and
weakening sfc front will be passing through, and will favor areas
near/east of U.S. 127. Most places will see less than a tenth of
an inch of rain.

Low temps tonight probably won`t fall below 40 in the southerly
flow preceding the front and highs Sunday will be back up in the
mid to upper 40s as better cold advection holds off until Sunday
night. Normal lows are in the mid 20s and normal highs are in
the mid 30s.

-Colder air arrives Sunday night

The polar jet dips south toward the GrtLks Rgn Sunday night and
the east coast storm deepens while lifting north. This tugs down
colder air from the north, with H8 temps falling to around -8C by
12Z Monday. Lake effect showers eventually get going, which will
initially be a mixture of rain/snow due to sfc temps in the mid to
upper 30s. It will be a close call, but impacts may be limited
for the Monday morning commute time since the coldest air and
heaviest snow showers look to hold off until just after that.
Exception may be up around Ludington where the changeover to snow
occurs quicker than in sw lwr MI.



  --------------------------  NJJ  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 330 PM EST Sat Dec 16 2023

We expect that snow showers will be ramping up over the area first
thing Monday morning, especially across the NW and SW sections of
the area. The secondary upper trough will be diving over the area at
that time. This strong trough combined with the warmer waters of
Lake Michigan looks to develop a sfc circulation. Lake effect snow
showers will be blossoming, and will likely be locally enhanced by
the sfc circulation. The SW corner of the area toward South Haven
looks to be the target for some of the heavier snow rates. The
typical uncertainty with regard to lake effect amounts is present,
along with some slight uncertainty regarding how far east the
heavier snow showers can make it. Blowing snow could be an issue
also with winds along the lakeshore likely to be over 40 mph.

Lake effect will continue into Monday night, but will probably
not be as robust as Monday morning with the sfc wave. The upper
cyclonic flow will be in place until after 00z Tuesday. This will
help keep inversion heights up, and convective columns favorable
for snow showers. There will probably be a slight weakening of
snow showers in the wake of the main trough and sfc reflection
moving east of the area. The snow showers should then taper off
quickly overnight as anti-cyclonic flow aloft moves in.

Once the brief bout of winter on Monday winds down, we will get
back to our mild and dry El Nino pattern that has been dominate
this fall. A broad long wave ridge will build over the region and
set up through at least Thursday, if not longer. Plenty of
subsidence aloft and a lack of moisture feed into the area will
allow for the mild and dry weather.

Some model ensemble members are showing rain chances becoming
possible as early as Friday, and some are holding off until
Saturday. This uncertainty lies with a short wave that ejects out of
an upper low complex off of Southern California. With the upper flow
rather flat over much of the 48 States, it will be tough to nail
down the exact track and impacts of this wave. The impacts do not
look significant as it would be mostly rain with the cold air still
locked up well north of the area.



  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1110 AM EST Sat Dec 16 2023

Any chance of showers today will be limited to areas west of Hwy
131 and mainly after 21Z as incoming moisture will be battling
very dry air below 10,000 ft seen on the 12Z DTX sounding. Virga
or sprinkles is probably the more likely scenario. New 12Z HREF
has a dry look as well for the remainder of the day, with zero QPF
indicated through 00Z on prob matched mean QPF progs. In fact
even tonight the rain struggles and less than a tenth of an inch
is shown, and mainly near/south of I-96. Nudged temps up a bit
this afternoon with a few locations already approaching 50.


  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Sunday)
Issued at 330 AM EST Sat Dec 16 2023

- Dry and Windy today

One more day will be dominated by high pressure as warm daytime
temperatures will allow for gusty southerly winds upwards of 20
mph this afternoon and evening. Any light showers and the
corresponding clouds should remain north of the southern lower
today as the region should remain stable with the upper level high
stifling any convection. However, there could be enough low level
moisture to allow for a sprinkle or two this afternoon so have a
slight chance pops.

The negatively tilted ridge over the Great Lakes will be pushed
eastward by a deepening upper level low moving through the
central United States. As the high treks eastward clouds will
continue to overspread the area this afternoon and evening.

- Cloudy with chance of showers Sunday

The upper level trough will swing through the midwest Sunday
bringing showers likely overnight through Sunday. The upper level
low should track to our south with the heaviest precipitation in
Indiana. Highs on Sunday will be in the mid 40s so any precipitation will
be rain through Sunday. Rain will be likely with ongoing showers
Sunday morning and should continue throughout the day. Highest
rainfall for southern Michigan should be along and south of the I
94 corridor. QPF could be upwards of a quarter of an inch through
daytime Sunday.



  --------------------------  MJS  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Sunday night through Friday)
Issued at 330 AM EST Sat Dec 16 2023


- Impacts Looking Likely For Mon into Mon Night

Models continue to show deeper cyclonic flow and stronger cold air
advection Monday into Monday night. This will generate deeper upward
vertical motion. As lake moisture feeds into the environment this
will lead to  lake effect snow.  Moisture is progged to lift up
through the DGZ which will support some heavier rates. The flow, 340
to 350 degrees, will favor the region mostly west of US-131 for the
most impacts.  Given the forecast lake induced CAPE values and
instability parameters, along with little vertical speed and
direction shear in the moist layer, we could end up with an event
that overperforms.  As the mixing height taps into the 30 plus mph
winds, we could see such gusts at the surface. We will bump up the
lake effect accumulations and winds for this period. Inversion
height drop off considerably late Monday night so we will lower the
POPs by Tuesday morning.

Models are struggling with the surface temperature Monday.  They are
reluctant to show values dropping off during the day and some even
suggest a diurnal rise to above freezing values in the afternoon.
Still any snow shower will be able to lower temps a few degrees and
support snow covered roads where they occur.


  --------------------------  RAH  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Saturday night)
Issued at 247 PM EST Fri Dec 15 2023

- Rain Late Saturday Afternoon through Saturday Night

High clouds will continue to filter in over the area as pressure
heights fall with the trough to the west approaching the area. The
continuation of southerly flow tonight will keep lows tonight in
the low to mid 30s. Saturday we`ll see more moisture and warm air
advection resulting in saturation from the mid levels down to the
lower levels with time. The low level jet noses in during the
afternoon along with positive vorticity advection providing lift
with the increase moisture. It may take time for the atmospheric
profile to saturate down to the surface. Once that saturation
occurs expect rain showers to start. Initial timing looks to be
during the late afternoon and early evening over the western half
of the area and then during the evening for the eastern half.
Temperatures tomorrow will be a little cooler due to the increased
cloud cover with highs in the mid to upper 40s.


  --------------------------  Thomas  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Sunday through Friday)
Issued at 247 PM EST Fri Dec 15 2023

-Showers Continue Sunday-

Showers ongoing Sunday morning continue throughout the day as the
upper-level low and associated weakening surface reflection
responsible ejects to the northeast. Will feature the best chance of
precipitation through 18z Sunday where moisture depth and shortwave
forcing is the greatest. With highs well into the forties, this
portion of the event will be purely rain.

-Lake Effect Snow Likely Monday-

A potent PV maximum/shortwave then digs into the Great Lakes region
Sunday night and Monday. Robust height falls provide mid-level
synoptic forcing, aided by low-level convergence along the
lakeshore. This combines with Surface-850 Delta Ts of around 20C to
provide a favorable setup for lake effect precipitation across West
Michigan. The favored area for precipitation is west of US131 given
the north-northwest flow regime. As temperatures fall behind a cold
front Sunday night and especially Monday, rain showers transition to
snow requiring continued monitoring for possible slick conditions.
Ensemble mean snowfall has trended slightly upward keeping
confidence in the lake effect potential.

The other concern is the potential for gusty winds over. Strong
850mb northerly winds behind a cold front, near the climatological
maximum according to ESAT guidance, will initiate robust cold air
advection. The corresponding increase in mixing heights will cause
breezy conditions for West Michigan, particularly near the
lakeshore. ECMWF Extreme Forecast Values of 0.5-0.8 for both
sustained winds and gusts highlight the nature of this well. There
is uncertainty as to the extent of mixing/cold air advection as well
as the strength of the low level jet which will affect how high
gusts get. Ensemble means suggest gusts to at least 30 mph are
possible. This will be monitored going into the weekend.

-Dry Mid Next Week-

Mid-level height rises and surface ridging become the prevailing
condition for the remainder of the week. This keeps dry and benign
conditions in place for the remainder of the week. Look for partly
cloudy to mostly cloudy skies with highs reaching the upper 30s to
low 40s by Thursday.


  --------------------------  RAH  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1007 AM EST Fri Dec 15 2023

No changes from the previous discussion.


  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Saturday)
Issued at 308 AM EST Fri Dec 15 2023

- Warm and Dry into the weekend

Clear skies this morning for the meteor showers will continue
today and into tonight as another day of beautiful weather with
above normal temperatures.

 A negatively tilted high pressure system will continue to
dominate the weather pattern today and into tomorrow. This will
keep any clouds north of the region through the daytime. Maximum
temperatures will be 10 to 15 degrees above normal with highs in
the upper 40s to low 50s today and in the mid to upper 40s
tomorrow.

 A deepening upper level trough will move into the central United
states this afternoon and will push the high pressure east ward as
it treks to the east tonight into tomorrow. While no precipitation
is expected for tomorrow there will be an increase of clouds
moving southward from the north overnight into Saturday.

 While clouds will increase and temperatures will be slightly
cooler any precipitation should hold off into later in the weekend
which will be discussed in the next section.


  --------------------------  MJS  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Saturday night through Thursday)
Issued at 308 AM EST Fri Dec 15 2023


- Potential for rain showers Saturday night into Sunday evening

One mid to upper level wave will be tracking northeastward through
the east side of the state during this time.  Moisture deepens up
and the low levels become saturated.  As a result we will feature
relatively high POPs for the passage of this system.  Ensemble qpf
values have trended up as well so, we will feature likely POPs for
some locations. Also, most members from the various models are
showing measurable qpf.

- Increasing potential for impacts Monday from snow

A potent mid to upper level wave will be digging down into the Great
Lakes region Sunday night into Monday.  Strong upward vertical
motion develops as impressive height falls occur.  Favorable
conditions for lake effect set up as cold air advection strengthens.
Winds may gust over 30 mph at times as well.  Ensemble wind gusts
from the models, especially on the lakeshore, show mean wind gusts
topping 30 mph Monday. As temperatures fall below freezing later
Sunday night and more so on Monday, we could see some icy/slick
conditions developing. The area mostly west of US 131 is most
favored for the lake effect precipitation as the flow will become
north northwest. We will raise POPs and feature more snow in the
forecast. The model ensemble snowfall forecasts along the lakeshore
have trended up so confidence is increasing.


  --------------------------  RAH  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Friday night)
Issued at 219 PM EST Thu Dec 14 2023

- Dry and Mild

Not much to talk about in the short term as the upper level ridge
continues to build over the area and the lingering influence of
the surface high to our south. Bumped of temperatures for Friday
looking at the 925 temperatures around 6C. May have to tweak them
slightly higher than what is in the current forecast, but areas
around I-96 and south look to get into the low 50s. There will be
some mid to high level clouds present Friday with moisture
advecting in around 10 to 20 kft. Low temperatures tonight and
tomorrow night will be in the low to mid 30s.


  --------------------------  Thomas  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Saturday through Thursday)
Issued at 219 PM EST Thu Dec 14 2023

-Virga or Light Showers Possible Saturday-

Mid level moisture increases Saturday as 700 mb southerly flow leads
to DGZ saturation. However, the atmosphere below the DGZ remains dry
through Saturday evening, and forcing in the DGZ is weak. This
environment would be supportive of mainly virga, with occasional
brief and light showers possible. In all of the ensemble suites
(EPS/GRR/CMC), a vast majority of ensemble members remain dry
through 00z Sunday (Saturday Evening).

-Showers Saturday Night into Sunday Followed by Lake Effect Monday-

Model guidance continues to support a period of showers Saturday
night into Sunday as a nearly vertically stacked upper-level low and
associated surface reflection traverse south of the area. Given this
and good ensemble support for measurable precipitation as
saturation occurs below the DGZ, will keep a 30-50 percent chance of
precipitation in the outgoing forecast. The best chance will be
south of I96, closer to the upper-level low.

The 12z suite of guidance, including ensemble means, then brings a
strong PV maximum/associated shortwave through the Great Lakes Sunday
night into Monday. This initiates robust cold air advection as
northerly flow takes hold, evidenced by ESAT meridional wind values
below 700 mb being under the tenth percentile. As 850 mb
temperatures fall into the -10C to -15C range, the resulting
instability supports a lake effect precipitation response in the
cyclonic flow regime. Given differences between the GFS/ECMWF/GEM in
the strength of the upper-level PV anomaly and associated QPF
response will keep precipitation chances limited to the NBMs 20-40
percent.

-Dry Mid Next Week-

Surface ridging and upper-level zonal flow build into the region, as
850 mb temperatures warm above 0C under increasing 500mb heights.
This supports a dry forecast Tuesday through Thursday for West
Michigan with highs around 40.


  --------------------------  RAH  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 956 AM EST Thu Dec 14 2023

No changes from the previous forecast.


  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Friday)
Issued at 254 AM EST Thu Dec 14 2023

--Mild weather with above normal temperatures

High pressure and clear skies will dominate the weather pattern
today. A large upper level ridge will build over the midwest and
move over the Great Lakes today into tomorrow. High pressure
throughout the atmosphere will stifle any clouds. The westerly
flow coupled with the warm air will allow for gusty winds this
afternoon. Max temperature today and tomorrow will be upper 40s to
low 50s which is 10 to 15 degrees above normal.



  --------------------------  MJS  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Friday night through Wednesday)
Issued at 254 AM EST Thu Dec 14 2023

- Small chances for precipitation Friday night into Saturday night

Not much has changed with the potential for precipitation in this
period.  If we do see some it should be limited and of a short
duration.  A series of mid to upper level troughs approach from the
west and southwest.  Moisture at these level increases and the DGZ
becomes saturated. Any lift in the DGZ looks weak.  Below this level
it is shown to be dry.  Thus we will likely see virga with perhaps a
potential for some precipitation to reach the ground.  Ensemble
trends are not increasing the potential for qpf and most members are
dry.

- Stay tuned for Sunday into Monday as we may need to increase the
precipitation risk

The storm that is to track up the Appalachians has been generally
trending west with its track.  Thus we are seeing more and more
ensemble members featuring precipitation, especially for eastern
zones.  The GFS continues to support little or no potential for qpf.
 We will give it one more run before adding precipitation to the
Sunday into Monday period.  Also, with the further west track of the
storm system, it will likely draw down more colder air from Ontario.
There is an increasing potential for lake effect, mainly Sunday
night into Monday.  Ensemble temperature trends are starting to show
a decrease in the temperatures for Monday.



  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 930 PM EST Wed Dec 13 2023

Earlier cloudiness has mostly dissipated but now there is
extensive cirrus spilling over the upper ridge and diving south
from Upper Michigan. Much of this should be relatively thin so a
mostly clear fcst will probably still work out fine tonight.


  --------------------------  Duke  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Thursday night)
Issued at 319 PM EST Wed Dec 13 2023

No impact weather concerns in the short term with high pressure in
control for the most part at the surface. A sprawling area of high
pressure will be situated in the short term from the Ohio Valley
northward into the Great Lakes. This will insure dry conditions
and limited cloud cover. The altocumulus clouds that remain over
the area as of 300pm should scatter out this evening leaving
mainly clear skies. On Thursday mid and high clouds increase and
we are expecting a partly sunny sky. Thursday night we should be
mainly clear again. We will warm into the 40s on Thursday which is
above seasonal normals for this time of year.


  --------------------------  Laurens  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Friday through Wednesday)
Issued at 319 PM EST Wed Dec 13 2023

The long range fcst period will be characterized by above to much
above normal temperatures for this time of year and predominantly
dry conditions. Dry wx is expected Friday through Friday night with
ridging at the sfc and aloft in control of the wx.

A weak and slow moving low pressure system will move in from the
west and bring a small chance of rain showers from late Saturday
into early Sunday. However the better chc for rain will stay south
of our area where there will be deeper moisture as the upper level
system moves across the lower Great Lakes region.

Dry wx is fcst early to mid next week as a sfc high pressure ridge
gradually builds in from the west. An overall medium range guidance
consensus continues to suggest temps will remain above normal with
mostly dry wx through the remainder of the week.


  --------------------------  Duke  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1129 AM EST Wed Dec 13 2023

A patch of altocumulus with bases around 10,000 feet will slide
southeast/scatter out this afternoon. Right now given the stark
edges to the cloud shield conditions range from full sun to
completely cloudy. The trend will be to near full or full sun by
the end of the afternoon. Otherwise, very benign weather given a
sprawling area of high pressure located across the Great Lakes and
Ohio Valley. Highs generally in the 30s today with around 40
expected in the far south towards I-94.


  --------------------------  Ceru  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Thursday)
Issued at 311 AM EST Wed Dec 13 2023


- Mild Weather will continue through the work week

A strong upper level low will be moving through eastern Canada.
While there will be a deepening upper level trough moving through
the region with a strong gradient all instability will be aloft.
Expect dry air and high pressure towards the surface. High
pressure through the mid to low levels will stifle any clouds
resulting in a mix of sun and clouds with a dry forecast. While
northwesterly flow will continue the gusty winds will subside
today. Maximum temperatures will be mild and will be just above
normal today and Thursday.



  --------------------------  MJS  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Thursday night through Tuesday)
Issued at 224 AM EST Wed Dec 13 2023

- Slight chance for a few showers over the weekend

Overall the pattern does feature lower than normal confidence as
timing, strength and track differences of several weak systems
exist.

One cold front/frontal zone tries to drop down from the
northwest Friday into Friday night.  Overall  deterministic and
ensemble model trends suggest this feature and it`s associated
precipitation will stay north of the CWA.  We will lower POPs in
this period.

One mid level wave was located over the Southwest
U.S. at this time while a second wave was tracking towards the
British Columbia shoreline. Models generally show these two systems
merging over the Lower OH Valley Saturday night or Sunday. Mid to
upper level moisture streams into Southwest Lower MI during this
time with the DGZ becoming saturated.  Lift is noted in this zone as
well. However, it`s the low levels that struggle to saturate.
Commonly in these situations we struggle to get enough precipitation
to measure and generally end up with some sprinkles/light showers.
Closer to the track of these systems, South Haven does see the low
level moisture increasing but not until Sunday. Currently we have a
dry Sunday going.  Ensemble qpf trends suggest that the potential
for a few showers Sunday is on the increase.  At this point, I am
not confident enough to add showers to Sunday`s forecast but if the
qpf trends continue we might need to add a small chance to Sunday`s
forecast, especially southwest zones.


  --------------------------  Meade  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1017 PM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

Skies have largely cleared south of about M-20 but even the
clouds in the north (and the patch around JXN) are expected to
move out overnight. Another area of clouds currently over MN will
streak our way late tonight and may bring a period of morning
cloudiness to wrn sections before mostly dissipating in the
afternoon. Have lowered min temps tonight a bit in ern sections
given the clearing as well as the diminishing winds inland from
LK MI.


  --------------------------  Duke  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Wednesday night)
Issued at 259 PM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

Very quiet weather by December standards is expected through
Wednesday night. Surface high pressure will slide through the
Southern Great Lakes and Ohio Valley during that time. We are not
expecting any precipitation.

Regarding clouds, stratocumulus production off of Lake Michigan is
occurring at this time. Plenty of instability is present both
tonight and on Wednesday, the issue for clouds is that moisture
levels are quite low. This can be seen in BUFKIT overviews. We are
looking at a mix of sun and clouds both tonight and Wednesday, but
at worst it`s probably a partly cloudy forecast. There are two
areas of mid clouds one over the Dakotas and one over
Nebraska/Iowa that converge on our area and move through Southwest
Lower Michigan on Wednesday. Most likely another partly cloudy
forecast. Mainly clear skies likely return for Wednesday night.
Highs and lows tonight, Wednesday and Wednesday night will likely
be near normals.


  --------------------------  RAH  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Thursday through Tuesday)
Issued at 259 PM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

- Slight Chance For Showers This Weekend

Overall the dry and mild weather continues as pressure heights
increase with a ridge building over the region Thursday. Expect
highs in the 40s with lows in the upper 20s to mid 30s through the
weekend. Ensembles are in agreement with this dry stretch and then
have a signal for some showers over the weekend due to some
shortwave troughing. Kept the NBM PoPs over the weekend with chances
for showers around 20 to 40 percent across the area on Saturday.
Plenty of dry air should keep rain amounts minimal for those who see
rain. Overall not a washout of a forecast with dry conditions
looking likely for the start of next week.


  --------------------------  TJT  --------------------------  

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1039 AM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

Main forecast change was to increase cloud cover this afternoon.
This was based on:

1) A 12Z Green Bay sounding supportive of stratocumulus that
could be further conditioned for clouds as this airmass traverses
Lake Michigan.

2) Little eastward movement of the upstream edge of stratocumulus
over southern Lake Michigan per the satellite visible channel;
this is indicative of sustained airmass modification over Lake
Michigan.

3) A lack of subsidence noted farther upstream (per water vapor
imagery) that would otherwise help to entrain drier air into the
boundary layer and erode clouds.

4) A climatological propensity for lake effect clouds this time of
year, due in part to minimized solar insolation as we approach
the winter solstice.


No other changes of note to the forecast are anticipated at this
time.



  --------------------------  NJJ  --------------------------  

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Wednesday)
Issued at 318 AM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

Forecast concerns are quite limited in the short term (and well
beyond) compared to what is more normal at this time of the year.
This pattern where the northern stream is north of the state, and
the southern stream is active over the southern states is a textbook
setup of December in an El Nino situation.

A weak sfc front will get pushed through the region today by the
upper wave that is well north of the area over Canada. The cyclonic
flow with the upper system will stay well north of the area, and the
sfc front will have only some shallow moisture to work with. This
may allow for some decent stratocumulus clouds this afternoon with
the cooler air in the lower levels coming in, and due to the diurnal
boost. The main thing this front will do is to reinforce the cool
airmass that was already in place, and delay any warming.

Sfc ridging will then build in for Wednesday. This will limit cloud
cover a bit more compared to what we are expecting today. The
coldest of the airmass will move out, and we should start a warming
trend on Wednesday with highs likely topping 40F.


  --------------------------  MJS  --------------------------  

.LONG TERM...(Wednesday night through Monday)
Issued at 403 AM EST Tue Dec 12 2023

The surface ridging remains in place into Friday. West to
southwest winds will advect in a milder airmass. An impressive 925
mb thermal ridge of 7 to 8 deg C thermal ridge tracks eastward
through the CWA on Friday. Mixing to that level conservatively
supports max temps reaching the upper 40`s for much of the area.
Ensemble 2m temps show very little spread in the temperatures for
Friday. There will be some wind at that level so as it warms up
and the mixing height deepens, the winds will increase. Gusts over
20 mph are looking likely.

A small chance for precipitation exists later Friday into
Saturday. A disorganized mid level wave drops southeastward from
the Upper Plains into the Middle Mississippi Valley, which a fast
moving shortwave tracks eastward through Ontario. The CWA will be
between these two systems and there might be enough moisture to
support a small risk for measurable precipitation. Rain will be
the primary type given the warmer thermal profile that will be in
place, although northeast zones may get close for some snow later
Friday night as the freezing level will be lower there. Ensemble
qpf values from the various models all show this system to be a
very light qpf event if it does precipitate.


